Privately held companies worth $1 billion are of special interest in business and finance because their success has been achieved without the need to raise capital on public markets. Additionally, if they do plan to go public, their initial public offering (IPO) will be worth hundreds of millions of dollars. This report explores the adequacy of the “unicorn” label by modeling the data generating process producing unicorn company valuation. If this underlying process can best be modeled by a single distribution, with one set of parameters, the label “unicorn” is adequate. If this underlying process is instead better modeled as a mixture of different distributions, each with different parameters, then it would be better to break unicorns down into different subspecies (so to speak). To answer this, I implement a Bayesian mixture model using the gibbsnorm() function in the bayess package in R. I then determine the optimal number of component distributions (one, two, three, or four) using model selection criteria and visualization techniques.

The analysis concludes that the three component mixture model is best. This model’s predicted density of logged valuation outperforms the predicted density of the two component and four component model. The predicted density of the one component model, which implies one set of parameters to describe all unicorns, performs poorly. The “unicorn” label is inadequate, and business and finance professionals should disaggregate unicorns into three groups to better understand valuations. The below report broadly describes these three groups, but future researchers should explore them in more detail. The chain for all the parameters converges and this analysis is robust to prior specification. 
